Yeah, he did, he didn't arrive, no.
He always does.
So we're talking about Department of Corrections planning for stable housing
outcomes, which we heard was very important. Let's rip into it.
Okay.
Lindsay.
Well, I will introduce myself for the purposes of this being a public hearing.
So I'm Lindsay Gibson. I'm-
Very nice. We haven't seen much of you lately, Lindsay.
With me is my colleague Brent Burton, and behind me is two more of my
colleagues, Chris Yee and Richard Scott. So they're on hand in case we need them.
But I'll hand over to Brent, who can talk you through.
Good afternoon, everybody. I just wanted to thank the chair and members for the
opportunity to speak. I appreciate the time set aside to discuss this
topic. I also understand that you're set a time of
very busy time for the committee, and I'm sure you've had a long
day already. So, um-
Always time for you.
Thank you very much. Um-
Just so you're aware, we've got
30, well, until 4:30, so.
What I-
20 minutes we'll go for-
Yeah.
Yeah. I wondered, to the chair, if I could have four minutes
to introduce the work.
Yes. We, we'll allow you that.
I know that at least one of my colleagues behind me will have the timer on
me. Um-
Oh, there's someone here in front, in front of you also.
So I'm prepared for the four-minute bell.
We looked at how corrections helps people plan for stable
housing on release, and how they connect people who need it to MSD
services and others.
This work sits, sits alongside work we did with MHUD and
MSD around how they support people in immediate housing need,
particularly pathways into emergency housing and transitional housing.
For those coming out of corrections care, we saw research that stable
housing is a critical factor in reducing re-offending.
This outcome is a key objective for corrections.
Other research also suggests that potentially as a result of stable housing
and wraparound services, there can be less resource reliance
on public services in the long run.
Focusing on longer term outcomes and on value for money are obviously important
lenses we take in our work.
I want to acknowledge the great corrections people we spoke to, with difficult jobs
and often difficult circumstances.
Each was unfailingly wanting better outcomes for the people they worked with, in
ways that kept the whole community safe.
They generally acknowledged how important stable housing is to achieving these
outcomes.
Corrections has a clear role in doing what it can to help people in its care
eventually reintegrate well into society.
In practice, this can mean understanding the housing needs of those preparing for
release, helping them plan to achieve stable housing outcomes,
and where MSD support is needed, doing what it can to connect those
people to that agency seamlessly.
However, research also indicated that more than half people leaving
corrections have an unmet housing need.
Corrections told us it currently does not know how many people leave prison
with a good plan for their housing needs.
We found that Corrections has good processes and guidance to support case managers
to help people plan for successful stable housing outcomes.
People serving long sentences appear to get more sustained
and longer contact and support with case
managers. They generally have parole conditions on release, and as you'll know,
accommodation is part of eligibility for parole.
Regional Corrections staff have good relationships with other regional public
service offices. Making sure people don't fall through gaps appears most
effective when there are these good inter-agency relationships on the
ground in regions, including when complex challenges require
innovative solutions. People leaving corrections have quite
distinct and difficult challenges in finding stable accommodation.
Despite this, many people on remand are at risk of not getting sufficient support
to help them plan for those needs. Remand represents 40% of prison
population and is projected to increase by number and by percentage.
There is often uncertainty about their length of stay and the potential for
immediate release.
Corrections needs to find additional ways of providing people who come to it on
remand with useful information about the full range of support that might
be available to them on release. This can help them plan for and
find stable housing outcomes on release.
We acknowledge Corrections' view that it is not a primary housing
provider and does not consider housing to be its core business.
It relies on other public service and housing organizations to support it
on release.
But it does have a clear role in understanding people's needs, helping them
plan and prepare for it, and where needed, helping connect them seamlessly to
MSD.
Wow. We're a very impatient committee, as Lindsay notes.
Yep.
But let's start, let's get into questions, because I think we want to get down to
that level. Can, um... Who's got questions? Tabitha?
I've got one.
Right.
So, yeah. Thank you so much. It's so important.
Sure.
I met with the Parole Board chair about this issue because I thought maybe they
would collect, because I know Corrections doesn't collect the data, but Parole
Board doesn't either. So how do we start collecting the data on where
people are going?
Yep.
S- so we understand that, uh, Corrections has started work with the IDI,
the, uh, Integrated Data Infrastructure, um, and we saw
some evidence of that, uh, which is starting to go towards that.
We know it's difficult to collect the outcomes of people who, uh,
might not want to necessarily disclose to Corrections, but we think there
are opportunities to work with the IDI.
The MSD and HUD, MHUD, uh, report that we put out
sort of, sort of asked the question of why agencies can't work
together with researchers, providers, and advocacy groups
to actually understand those outcomes.
And what was the outcome?
Uh, we haven't yet, uh, been asked to present to committee on that
report yet Um, I think that it is likely to go to another
report, a social-
All I'd ask, don't come tell us there's an issue, tell us what-
Yeah. Yeah
... the next step is, right?
So we want
MHUD to lead that work, and we think that there are lessons for Corrections to
share and to learn from in that.
Right. Todd Stevenson?
Yeah. And thanks to you both for being here.
Yeah, in your obviously your report and working on it,
what more can you tell us about Correction working with those other
agencies today? You mentioned Corrections themselves have got some quite good
obviously resources for their staff, et cetera.
Yep.
But then actually that interface with the other agencies, how is that working?
Is that an area where you think-
Well, there's inter-
... improvement's needed?
I think there's interface in two areas.
One's in regional, regional offices where they're working with other public service
agencies and providers to get people with
challenging and complex needs and providing
solutions on the ground, and we think that works reasonably well.
And it also means that Corrections is able to work with
MSD to help people seamlessly move towards their
services.
At a higher level, I guess,
we have seen, as I say, Corrections working in the IDI, and we
also have seen very recently them providing information
and working with MHUD and MSD, in that
homelessness insights report, to report some of the data that they're finding
about outcomes. Those were probably the key points where we saw them working
together with other agencies.
And just one more question if I might, Mr.
Chair, because you particularly mentioned remand prisoners.
Yep.
And obviously we know that is a growing-
Corrections are dealing with more remand prisoners than they ever have before.
Yep.
Again, in your view, do you think that's one of the issues, they just haven't had
such a large remand population before, and so that's not something that's
as... Well, that population of prisoners is-
We-
... not used to working
... we were told by a number of Corrections staff that corrections facilities
have been built in the past for a remand population of
15%.
Yep.
Now that it's 40%, and I think I've seen projections of it
going to 45% over a number of years,
they do describe that as a bit of a challenge, yes.
There's obviously also uncertainty about how long a person can-
Yes
... be on remand, and that they can be immediately released, time served or
otherwise, which means that case managers
might be finding it difficult to get to those people-
Yeah
... to provide. And I think what we're suggesting is, let's find practical
ways of getting them information about the support that they can go to.
Yeah.
And that might be things like,
my view is that it could be things
like group inductions. It could be things like videos
shown to numerous people. It could be those sorts of things.
Right. Yeah.
It might not necessarily be that a case manager has to
see person one to one.
Something simple that could be delivered in a timely manner.
Possibly, yes.
Yeah.
In your report, you say $27 million was set aside in '24,
'25, and that allowed for 1,200 placements.
That sounds all very good.
So
future budget going forward, and what sort of percentage
of the prison population, both remand and prisoners, does
1,200 represent? Is it like-
Well, there's 15,000 people leaving
Corrections every year. So 40% of that, I
guess, is about-
More than 1,200
... 6,000.
Yeah, but anyway.
And then you've got 1,200 people in those prisons.
Yeah, but some of them won't be on remand for a day, right?
Yeah. Certainly some can. I think I-
Some, hopefully
... could be wrong. I think I read something the other day about the average being
something like 89 days.
Yeah, there is an average.
But you're quite right.
But even-
There's a high portion of one to 10 days.
But even if it's 89 days,
you don't think a lot of those people when they come out, even if they're remand,
don't go back into a home of some sort?
They-
Like they have a home?
Well, I don't think Corrections or us knows the answer to that question.
Yeah.
I don't think we know because we're not me- because we, say
the collective we, are not collecting information on outcomes-
So we don't know whether the 1,200's good or bad, actually
... of prisoners. Well, the 1,200 is in supported accommodation, and we heard a
number of good things about supported accommodation.
But overridingly, everyone said, "Well, that's brilliant for 16 weeks.
What happens then?" And again, we didn't see measurement
of the outcomes.
Okay, good point. Okay, Duncan.
So I'm just interested to try and put the finger
on where the problem is because as a constituency
MP, prisoners are the hardest people-
Yep
... to find places for.
Absolutely.
But for pretty obvious reasons, people don't really like them coming to their
subdivision.
It strikes me that in the legislation there's kind of the
ability to engage in
that kind of work, reintegration work,
but no real mandate, if you know what I mean.
And I'm not sure if you're saying
if part of the problem is that
Corrections can say, "Well, we do what we can, but it's not our actual job,"
because it's not in the legislation,
or whether it's more of a organizational
issue than a funding... Or is it a whole mix of
funding, legislation, cultural?
I couldn't put a finger on whether it's on the legislation side of things.
But there is a clear expectation for Corrections to do what it can to
ensure that people are able to successfully integrate back into the
community.
And so there is an expectation of that, yes, and I think it's more-
Within the organization?
I think it's more than the organization, but I would have to check that.
But what I would say is,
if Corrections has an
objective of reducing re-offending-
This is a key point
... and if it has an objective of reintegrating people successfully-
... then this is key.
Thanks.
Could you just talk about, and I don't know, why is it called out the
Out of Gate. I presume it is obvious, but
it seems a weird title to use.
Yeah.
But anyway, let's just put that on the side.
You said there's 9.8 million set aside for it, and that's part of what you were
just talking about.
Yep.
I presume that's what that service does.
Again,
can you give us an indication,
how many thousand prisoners or remand
prisoners does this serve, and
do you have a view whether it's adequate or whether it's grossly
under-resourced or what?
Well, I understand, and I'm trying to find the number here in amongst a
whole lot of numbers, but I think there was-- Here we go,
2,645 people started the Out of Gate program.
Not even completed.
I don't think anyone knows the outcome of that program.
Just to be clear, Out of Gate is not a housing provider.
It's a sort of a navigational service.
Yeah, but it's like what you were talking about.
Yep, and it's available to people on remand or those on sentences of
less than 24 months.
So if you opened up the program or saw the start of the video, you
encountered this one, 2,600.
Yeah.
So we don't even know whether they looked at it to the end, nor whether they
accessed the service.
Well, we understand they started the service.
What happened from that point-
Who's they?
Oh, sorry, people on remand-
Yeah
... who choose to go on that program.
Yeah.
And it is a choice. And I think
one of the things that we're wanting to say is,
or one of the things that we were told is, Out of Gate might only be in someone's
knowledge if they're told about it by a case manager.
And if they don't get to see a case manager, Out of Gate won't be something on
the minds of a person leaving remand.
And I think that's one of the other points, is around what are the practical
changes that Corrections can make-
Yeah
... to ensure that the information's getting to those certain people,
and also in terms of measuring and tracking, or what impact does that have in
terms of particularly the loop back into the Corrections system?
Yeah.
Right. Who else got questions?
I've still got one.
Yeah, go, Timothy.
Boarding houses, so that's one of the big places where some of these people
go.
Will you be looking into some of that and the lack of regulation that exists in
those boarding houses? Or is that bit out?
I don't think that's on the plan yet.
One of the things that we do intend to do, probably in perhaps a couple
of years, is to follow up a little bit on what's happened in response to our
recommendations. One thing I would say about boarding houses, both in
this work and the work of MSD and MHaD, is
that
people told us
they were not safe places for people.
They were often seen as last resort.
Mm.
And I don't think anybody
wants to picture a society where the whole problem is solved by boarding houses.
Yeah, and that's another big constituency complaint that I
get, is that they just seem to be poorly placed in
random places, and people get upset about it, and it's like, well,
where else can they go?
I'm not sure about placement or geography, but what we were told
is that they are not often safe places for people.
No, not regulated.
Particularly people who have very complex needs, including mental health
challenges.
And addiction challenges is another one, too.
And it ties into some of the things this committee's heard earlier today around the
gaps, around what's available on the ground for people to access and the existing-
Right. Last question, Tamala, and then we're going to get started.
I've just got a question around independence that people are able
to have once they leave a Corrections facility.
So, a couple of different aspects to that.
I understand kind of colloquially from speaking to
prisons that fewer people are able to get job
placements,
so in-work placements, just to do with the overall higher
unemployment, and obviously that's having a reflection there.
Yeah.
And the second thing is the amount of money that people are given when they leave
to try and set up hasn't changed, I think, in-
It's quite a few years
... how long? Like 20 years, maybe.
Many years.
A really long time. So, is some of the reason that
we're having these accommodation
issues associated with people's ability to be able
to kind of independently pay for what they need in
order to set up a-
We didn't cover that, but I don't doubt that that's the case.
Of course, for those that don't
have the income and therefore can't afford to go into the private market, one of
the key things for us is how Corrections is connecting people
to MSD.
Okay, cool. We heard the message. Right, guys, we can't refer to the
support.
Sorry, may I just say one thing? We did put some thought
into questions that the committee may want to ask
Corrections about our report.
Yeah, we've seen them.
Yeah.
You've seen them?
Yep, we've seen them.
Okay, cool.
Let's rip into it. Right. And I think we've got enough here
that members will all know what they want to ask, I'm sure.
Sweet as.
Right. Let's get these people in, eh?
They're here.
They're here? Right, you come in here. Right, I knew you were here.
Right. Cool.
Thanks so much.
Thank you.
You have been waiting patiently. I've seen you down the back there for a long
time.
That's right. I've spent some time here this week.
Immersed in our processes. Right.
We've got 20 minutes, so I don't want to spend a
lot of time. I'd rather let the committee ask you questions, but if you want just a
couple of minutes.
That'd be great. Thank you, Chair.
Just to introduce ourselves, and then I will spend a couple of minutes with a
high-level over response to the report.
I'm Juanita Ryan. I'm the Deputy Chief Executive for Communities, Partnerships and
Pathways for Department of Corrections. Got Dr.
Bronwyn Morrison to my left, who is the Director of Reintegration and
Community Services, and Rob Jones to my right, who is the
Director of Integrated Systems.
Chair, thank you for the opportunity to engage with the committee on this important
topic today. Corrections welcome the OIG report, and we are
pleased its recommendations are broadly consistent with the direction that we are
heading. We agree strongly with the report's central premise, that
stable and secure housing is critical to successful reintegration and
reducing re-offending. While Corrections is not a housing
agency, we have a deliberate and targeted role in supporting people as they
transition from prison back into the community, particularly where the
risk to the public is the highest. I want to make three key points up
front. First, we are already making a significant and targeted investment
in this space. We currently fund, as I said before,
327 supported accommodation beds nationwide,
supporting people with medium through to high risk and complex needs.
These placements are ideally short-term and transitional, in theory, to
support up to that 1,200 people per year.
In addition, we operate 33 beds on Corrections land for the highest
risk individuals, those who cannot be safely accommodated elsewhere in the
community. These beds are consistently allocated and represent a
critical part of our risk management system.
Second, we accept the direction of the OIG recommendations and are
actively progressing them. We've already made significant changes through our
integrated pathways work, which is strengthening how our case managers and
probation officers work together, improving our reintegration planning,
and enabling better measurement of outcomes.
And we acknowledge there is more work to do, particularly in improving how we
monitor effectiveness, and that work is well underway, and we will speak to that
shortly. Third, and finally, this is fundamentally a system-wide
challenge that Corrections cannot solve alone.
Each year, more than 11,000 people, individual people,
15,000 people coming in and out of prison, but it's 11,000 individual people are
released from prison, and around 26,000 are managed in the community.
Supporting this safe reintegration requires coordinated action
across the housing and social system.
We work closely with MSD, Kaianga Ora, iwi, and community providers to
connect people to housing and support, but the wider housing system also
ultimately determines availability and access.
We see supported accommodation as critical, a short-term investment that
fills a real gap at the point of release and directly supports public
safety. Thank you, and we welcome your questions.
Okay. Right. Who wants to lead off with questions?
Who wants to go?
Well, I can if you like.
Okay. Dr. Duncan, please.
Because quite a tricky question.
Right.
And I guess one of the
first question is how big is this problem?
Because in terms of the work that you are trying to do, which is to keep
people out of jail, right,
then if we're failing at this bit, this accommodation and
support bit,
and if we're failing, if you can fit 1,200 in a year and there's
1,200 who don't fit in,
do we have any idea of the size of the problem of
how many people we're actually failing?
I'll kick off, and I'll hand to Bronwyn.
Where we are assessing housing need
consistently is with those who are on sentence and have
community conditions, which are coming back out into the...
That we will follow them up in the community.
Often, that's the parole board setting conditions that we need to monitor and
manage. And out of that group, that's about 6,000 people per year.
It's around about 800 people that are identified as having no
fixed abode. So it's not necessarily half of all the people in
prison, and even of that number,
that could be due to accommodation falling through, it could be
due to someone couch surfing for a period of time and then
finding a suitable accommodation, and it could be to do
with someone being genuinely homeless.
So that is the group that we are, I guess, the most concerned to ensure that we're
working across the system with.
If there are two
classes then we don't have visibility over, one is
where I serve my entire sentence because,
and then I just walk free because there's no conditions.
Or, okay, you're shaking your head. We'll come back to it.
Yeah.
And then you've got the remand
accused who, for whatever reason,
get not guilty and they walk,
often from the courts, right? Are they both problems
or is it... Because the last one seems to be. Is the second one as well?
It is. And the real challenge with people on remand
who don't have conditions is they often are quite mistrustful of the
system, quite mistrustful of Corrections.
Yeah.
They're often not inclined to share with us if they do have an address.
So it's hard for us to track actually whether they've got somewhere safe
to go or not. What we do have in remand
is the Reintegrative Remand Service that was
referred to earlier, and you'll have seen in the report actually over the last few
years, the number accessing that service has doubled from about 500 to
1,000. And the idea of that service, which doesn't require a case
manager to have engagement with the individual, is to support people
with these sorts of needs, noting that the vast majority of people that come
into prison are there for less than 15 days.
So it's quite hard for us to engage them in a meaningful shift to support housing
in that short period of time.
The majority of people who come into prison are there for less than 15
days, did you just say?
Yeah, a large-
In remand.
Yeah, in the remand population. So I think just-
Okay. So
can we just dig down on that number a little bit?
Yeah.
Because it's really unusual, right?
15 days on remand
seems very short when you've got a remand population that's
40% of 11,000,
which would suggest that you've got a churn of many, many thousands of people going
through remand. That doesn't quite add up for me, especially when we know that
there are some people who are on remand for two or 300 days, right?
Can you explain that?
I maybe help with that, Duncan. So I think what we're often talking about is
average, and of course, when you've got people there for very long periods and
you're looking at an average, that immediately starts to blow the numbers out.
But people do cycle through.
Mm-hmm.
So you have quite a high attrition with people in for a month or less, and I think
it's important to really reflect on what the reality of that month or two-week
period might look like. People are coming in, they're coming off drugs and alcohol.
They're very-- It can be very upset, agitated.
So I know there will be a risk of when they're not given bail first time around.
Yeah.
And then second hearing that's all around bail.
Yeah, and charges change too. So you might
be on a charge, and then suddenly your charges get negotiated down.
You're then on bail. So it's just a really dynamic space.
Charges, new charges might come on in the midst of that.
So it's quite difficult, and it's very unpredictable to sometimes know who's
going to be there for extended periods and who's going to be in and out.
Probably the longer you're on remand, the more likely it is
in housing. Because if you're on remand for two weeks, the likelihood
is still got your rental or your accommodation
previously.
Well, and I think that's the other thing.
People don't always have stable housing prior to-
Yeah
... entry into the corrections system.
Yeah, you guys, it--
Sorry, sorry.
Just so I can clarify something, if you're on
remand and you're released after, say, two weeks, do you have to give an
address to-
No
... Now, if you're on remand or if you've got a sentence for, say,
two years and you're released,
you've got to give an address, or you've only got to give an address if it's part
of your bail condition?
Parole.
Parole conditions, sorry.
So released on conditions, people that are going-
Right
... because the parole board are comp-- generally give us an address.
Because that was the issue that we were seeing a lot of when we were in, right, was
if they were released on parole-
Yes
... then it was managed.
Yeah.
But if they weren't, if they were just released,
we were having challenges around where-
Right. Yeah
... they were being released to, essentially dropped off on the side of the park.
Provide a bit of clarity there. So under the two-year mark, if you
get released at about the halfway point of your sentence, you'll be released on
conditions. So that will require some kind of probation engagement in the
community, and we would know the addresses of those people for the most part, as
long as
they're willing to tell us. And even when they're no fixed abode, typically within
a short period of being released from prison, they are reporting to a probation
officer, and we would know an address for them.
Similarly with parole, part of the ability to be able to get parole is you have to
present a reasonable release plan, which housing would be a core component part of
that to ensure that community safety needs will be met.
So you could release someone,
just picking up on something you just said, on the basis of no fixed abode.
So you could-
Well, if-
... literally know that when they're released
... they're on a short sentence, it's not a decision to release them.
They are automatically released under legislation. So, yeah.
Yeah, I'm not a-- I get that point. I'm more asking that you, just the way you
framed that, it sounded like-
No
... at the point of release, you are clear that they have no
fixed abode.
Not for parole, but for-- We don't make the decision of releases-
Yeah, no, I appreciate that
... for sentences.
I'm more asking about information.
So the way I heard what you said was
that even if you release them and they have no fixed
abode, so you're aware at that point.
Well, I guess we're not making the decision to release them.
I'm not saying you make the decision. I'm asking how would you know.
There are some cases that some will get to the end of their
sentence release date. They may have been declined by the parole board a number of
times.
Yeah.
And they may be
at the point of release, we may not have a stable address for
them, and we would generally be aware of that if they-
Right. And so in that scenario, is there anything
that Corrections does
from that point? So I get you don't have to, and I get that
they've got to be released and all of that.
I'm asking with that piece of information, what's the process
that happens?
So
that particular group would be picked up almost certainly by a probation
officer in the community. So the probation officer in the community and the case
manager in prison are working really closely to try and resolve these things
because we know this is not just about an individual's wellbeing, but it really
increases their risk of reoffending if they're so destabilized in terms of some of
those basic foundations. And so as Ronald was
saying before, as they return to the community and they're required to report into
probation,
in theory they would not-
But if they're not released on probation, what happens?
That would
probably be a very small group of people who are on a sentence-
Yeah
... who would get to the end of that finite sentence in prison that wouldn't
have a period where they were on probation.
And if that was the case, there would be
little follow-up that we could do without their voluntary engagement with us.
We just have no mandate to work with those people who aren't being managed with
Corrections.
So what happened? So I get it's a small amount of people.
So walk me through, though, what happened. So I've finished my sentence.
I've gone right to the end. There's no probation.
I say I've got no fixed
abode. I'm at the gates. What happens to me?
First, just to back up on that, we would do everything we could before that point
for that not to be the outcome for that individual.
Okay.
And the case manager would be walking alongside them.
We've regularly got probation officers in the community as well, constantly
reviewing addresses, so engaging with the individual.
There may be multiple addresses that are checked during that period of time.
So-
You'll physically go and check them?
Yes, we will ensure that the address is-
If they are on conditions and-
If they're on conditions, you turn up and say, "Where are you sleeping?"
Yeah.
But assume my scenario. So you've done all of that, final day
at the gate.
And say, "Well-"
Is that it?
"I've done this sentence."
Well, there's very-
I'm not trying to get you to-
No, yeah
... just going to the end. I'm just trying to understand.
Yeah. Great.
Let's go to Tamsin.
Yeah.
Okay. Tamsin.
Just a question around the data as well.
Is there a way that Corrections can talk to MSD?
Because surely people coming out are not going into-
Yeah
... a homeownership. So surely they'll be collecting
some form of
accommodation.
I think the challenge for us partly is the issue of getting people on housing
lists prior to being released. So you've got that challenge of coming out of prison
and then having to get an appointment with MSD to then get your housing needs
assessed, because while you're in prison, you are technically- Have housing.
So that's been something that we've been working really closely with MSD to see if
we can get those processes, particularly at that regional level, which Brent
mentioned, to get them much clearer so that people can possibly go on housing lists
prior to the point. Particularly when we know what their release date is likely to
be, which is often the case with people who are on those longer sentences, who tend
to be those higher risk people that we are most concerned about from a community
safety perspective.
And we're certainly not trying to do this alone.
We are certainly not trying to do this alone, and we're really working
hard with our colleagues in other parts of the system to support a
pathway for people that helps them just get back out into the community.
And just-
You have another one? Yep
... to follow up on that. I know this isn't your decision, you don't set the
budgets, but the Steps to Freedom grant,
surely that was originally designed to put people into a bit of
accommodation in the meantime, while they sort out all their MSD stuff.
Do you think that plays a role in that that amount hasn't been adjusted for
decades and that maybe that's... Is that something that's difficult
because that person coming out of prison doesn't have any immediate form
of income to access housing? How does that play into it?
Not to go into the Steps to Freedom itself, but I think there are,
for many people in prisons, we are working with them at so many points to try
to support their accommodation, that is probably quite a small
consideration in the overall picture of what we can work with them to offer
up in terms of accommodation options.
Both, as I said, to the point of houses on corrections land for those who are
really, really difficult to safely accommodate, our accommodation,
MSD,
and other private rentals. So we've really tried out and hard not
to make something like that become a barrier.
Well good. Camilla. Camilla?
That's okay.
All right. No, Camilla.
Oh,
Dr. Burnham was just going to say something. Do you just say what you was going to?
Just going to say, I think affordability is an issue when people try and transition
then out of transitional housing. So that is a real challenge.
How much is the money? How much do you get?
350.
350?
Yeah.
Which doesn't last long.
Yeah. What strikes me, one of the related issues is that
people leave prison broke, right?
Has any thought been given to increasing the rates of pay that
prisoners get so they can get a little kitty
of $1,000, say, for a year's work? You know what I mean?
Because at the moment it's like-
60 cents or something
... 60 cents an hour is the most they can get, isn't it?
And that just pays for your noodles.
So we are just about to embark on a large scale review of prison industries,
but also vocational training and education.
So that will be a consideration within that piece of work.
And when will you finish that by?
Hoping within the next 12 months. That's the fixed term contract, so the
timer's running.
Prisoners' wages were reviewed already, though, weren't they?
It's not wages, it's not called wages, but-
I think it's something that we constantly turn our attention to, but I can't
recall-
A formal review
... a formal review.
Strikes me as a relatively-
Right, Camilla
... good thing to do.
Thank you, and thanks for this report.
I think just apart from obviously the need for
human beings to have housing, the recidivism aspect of those who don't
have appropriate housing makes this an incredibly important issue to
solve. At a look through the report, I couldn't see
if there were any other
jurisdictions who maybe have done this better than New Zealand
has. Or was that something that you considered at all?
I guess it wasn't our report, it was the Office of the Auditor-General's report.
Oh, sorry. Was there something that we-
Our response. So New Zealand actually has, compared to some other, particularly
Australian jurisdictions, we have a lot more supported accommodation that we
provide. Some of those jurisdictions have minimal of no supported
accommodation provided from a corrections space for people exiting prison.
So I think in that regard,
New Zealand's just quite unique with its geography and its population
distribution, which creates its own particular set of challenges.
So in some ways it's quite difficult to compare.
But certainly, I think the Housing First initiative has been one that we've
really copied from other jurisdictions and used with considerable
success here in New Zealand.
Hey, I asked two questions before.
First one is the
9.8 million for Out of Gate.
If you got 18 million,
would that help or you don't know?
I guess, no, I don't know.
The-
I know it's a weird question because everyone will say we need more money, but
could you
put up a good justifiable business case why it should be 18 million?
I'm trying to understand just how
compelling this case is.
I think that the
challenge from the
Auditor-General's report around
the
need for us to better qualify and measure the impact of
our services is compelling.
And it is certainly something that we have picked up and acknowledged,
and they are correct in saying that we understand the number of starts.
We need to get much better at also collecting for this particular program-
Finishes
... the completions. Absolutely.
Liz hit back there-
And what that means
... wiping her head.
Yeah. And actually, but what is the impact?
So it's not just about the starts and completes, we really need to also
be consistently understanding the impact and quality assuring them, and that
is part of the work program that Bronwyn is driving.
So there might be more you want to say about that.
Yes, we are making some changes to the Out of Gate service.
So we are sort of taking that more towards that high and complex need group of
people. So trying to deliver a higher quality of service to the people who
pose the greatest community safety risk and have the highest level of need.
And that's based on evidence that when we work with those people, we get the best
outcomes and best reductions in reoffending.
When,
if we were to write in our report that we recommend we
invite you two back, experts on this, when are you
likely to have that piece of work finished?
So that service goes live on the 1st of July.
So we'll be looking to evaluate that within the next probably two years.
I just have a follow-up question, maybe this is part of your measurement.
Because obviously, I think you mentioned you're working with the IDI.
Yeah
Because obviously, you could then track when those people hit
another part of the government system. Is that what you're thinking about?
So, yeah. And we are exploring doing some research with Otago University.
I'm really mindful that the transitional housing data set arrives in the IDI
in the next month.
Yeah.
So, it opens up a really good opportunity for us to look at the interplay between
transitional housing use and then longer term re-offending outcomes.
And I think it'd be really beneficial for us to take that longer view look, too, to
look what happens
maybe one year, two year, but also maybe five years-
Yeah
... to see what the real impact of it is.
All right. We heard that.
Pity it wasn't in the report, but we hear that.
Second thing, the 27 million on supported accommodation
does 300 beds, 1,200 people.
Mm.
Did you go to your minister and say, "Well, we need a
lot more money," or what?
Again, I'm trying to judge what's our meet
need, potentially?
Yeah.
I will pass this to Bronwyn. I think what we've recognized is
similar to what Bronwyn has just indicated there, is the way we've established
some of the accommodation is, when we reflect back on it, it's not
always necessarily in the right geographical location.
We have got
a lot of people with higher needs where we don't have accommodation set up
for, and those with some lower and less complex needs, where we do have
accommodation for. And a lot of that group can actually find their own way quite
well out into the community, and towards
accommodation independently of us.
So, the work that Bronwyn has been leading is very much around, how do we better
meet the needs of those who will struggle the most to
obtain secure accommodation in the community?
And doing quite a lot of alignment of that piece of work to
support that the evidence of who we should be focused on the most as an
agency for that security of our community perspective is who's
accessing the beds.
Yeah. There is some real challenges that we face in terms of transitioning people
out of those services. So whilst we might say they're transitional and we're aiming
for three to six months, some people do spend extended periods of time in there
because we really struggle, particularly older people who've come out of
prison who perhaps require some rest home care.
We really struggle at times to find placements for those people.
So, we're really looking at what additional services we might add to our portfolio
to better meet those needs. I think part of the challenge here, too, is the
community resistance to having people in the community.
So, they're happier to have those lower end, lower risk people living alongside
them.
Are you finding a problem when you've got someone who's 70 or whatever-
Mm
... and declining health, that private
facilities are saying, "We don't want that sort of
person in our service."
That is a challenge.
Yes.
Right.
That's something to look forward to, Duncan, I'm afraid.
All right, cool.
Yeah, that's interesting.
Okay, thank you.
Hey, well, look, I want to thank you all.
I think we'll be making a recommendation that you should come back to a future
Justice Committee.
Yeah.
I think
from what you heard,
it is such a vital part of that,
reducing the cycle of people transitioning out of prison, back into
prison. So, the more you can do, we'd just encourage you to do that.
But thank you for all the work that you do.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks, Marie T.